# Response to Blumenstock - Don't forget about humans in data for development

In Blumenstock's article "Don't forget about humans in data for development," the author develops the argument that a humbler data science, in which people are considered as much as numbers, could transform international development while also limiting the number of silver bullets that have missed their mark in revent years. Big data encompasses information that is collected and analyzed from technology and in this article specifically the author talks about Big Data from mobile phones and satellite data. 

Blumenstock mentions the immense promise that data has in the realm of human development as a foundation for his thesis. With the introduction of the mobile phone and data that can be and is collected from those devices, conclusions and infrences about the needs of those using the devices can be made.  Studies have found that algorithms used to match consumers with advertisements online could be used to match resources to those who need them.  Using data about variables such as how many international calls a user makes, for example, can be used to deduce the level of poverty that that person lives in.  From these inferences, areas of poverty and malnutrition can be identified and eventually aided.  In theory, using data as such seems like an easy way for governments to efficiently and effectively help less fortunate citizens, however reducing poverty is not a simple task. Nonetheless, there are still promising aspects of using data as such.  In the public health sphere, digital footprints could help during natural disasters or the spread of disease.  Soon, Blumenstock argues, it could be possible to obtain information about individuals affected by natural disaster minute by minute.  

Blumenstock also mentions some pitfalls of such tools.  Firstly, he mentions the unanticipated effects, such as the risk of the technology being used in ways that dont benefit citizens.  He states that "solutions enabled by big data often bolster those who are already empowered" because the large amount of data is analyzed and derived value by only a couple people.  In the case of digital loans, no published study has concluded whether these loans help people or lead to poverty cycles and death traps.  Additionally, there is a lack of validation -- these tools could be used before they have been sufficiently tested, and there are cases of biased algorithms.  The tools could be trained on biased data, which leads to highly inaccurate predictions and out-of-sample data.  For example, Google Maps and Waze are used to understand urban mobility, but such apps require access to cellular data or wifi, which many communities that need help do not have.  Also, an example that Blumenstock gave was governments in Africa used satelites to look for thatched roofs to then give poverty aid.  However, people found out that this was occuring and started building shacks with thatched roofs next to their actual home.  The lack of regulation is also concerning.  Data is often placed in the hands of those who mainly care about maximizing profits, which can lead to manipulation and people being taken advantage of.  

In order to address these concerns and move forward into a world of efficient usage of technology in human development, Blumenstock argues that we must validate conventional datasets, customize technology, and deepen collaboration within the private sector.  The deeper collaboration should be within the private sector, but also with nonprofit organizations to blend humanitarian values with new technology.  
