# Development and Complexity 
## Meredith Webb
## Evolving Solutions
## February 17 2020
### 1. Washington Consensus: What is the washington consensus? How did it propose to improve upon models of economic growth?
  The Washington Consensus is a series of policy reforms comprised of 10 items: fiscal dicipline, spending priorities, tax reform, market interest rates, competitive exchange rates, trade liberalisation, inward FDI, privatisation of state enterprises, deregulation, and secure property rights.  It proposed to combat the issues with the current models of economic growth that were lacking in living up to countries' theoretical potential in effective policiy.  Some argue, however, that the Washington Consensus was a failure in that efforts to make markets free did not lead to assimilation of poor countries into the industrialised, growing world in the way it was supposed to.  Despite these claims, some of the reforms included in the Washington Consensus were effective, such as liberalising exchange rates and decreasing public deficits, are believed to have assisted in economic growth in some sub Saharan African countries in the last twenty years.  Policy is a vital element in advancing human development.  The author asks his audience the question: if the difference between rich countries and poor countries in not failures of policy, then what is it? Sustainable change can only be implemented in legislation. 
  
 ### 5. Robert Solow Model: What was the Robert Solow model? How did it address the limitations of the Harrod- Domer model? Was this model successful at predicting economic growth?
  The Robert Solow Model was a neoclassical growth model introduced in the late fifties which added 'technical change' as a third element (in addition to labour and capital).  The origins of this technical change is not explicilitly stated in the model.  Rather, it is treated as a magic element which, when combined with labor and capital, increases output of each firm.  It addressed the limitations of the Harrod- Domar model in the sense that it was more representitive of reality.  In the example given about Ghana and South Korea- two countries with similar average income per person until the 1970s-  simply looking at labor and capital would not explain why South Korea's economy took off while Ghana's stagnated.  Therefore, Solow's model fits the data much better than Domar's; nonetheless, Solow's model is not perfect.  It is not defiitively a model, rather, it is a form of accounting, breaking down growth into increases in labor, capital, and some other undefined component called 'technical change.'  The root of the problem with Solow's model is the 'unexplained' nature of this technical change, because when comparing countries, this model shows that the difference between poor and rich countries is this technical change.  Not knowing how countries obtain this technical change warrants confusion about how to move forward and address the lack of development.  In addition, it seems unlikely that this magic technical change would not spread to poor countries.  Knowledge is cheaply reproduced.  During a period of war or natural disaster, it may be possible that a country would fall behind in technical change, but this technical change variable does not really account for every poor country's situation. 
 
