Human development is defined as the process of enlarging people's freedoms and opportunities and improving their wellbeing.  Traditionally, many view human development as being reliant on economic growth. In Selim Jahan's podcast episodes, he argues that human development should be focused on the richness of life rather than monetary gains.  Selim Jahan sees human development as having two main purposes: to enhance human capabilities and to provide greater opportunities to utilize these opportunities.  An inbalance between these two measures causes an inefficient human development initiative. 
 
Jahan references many issues that require focus around the world. He talks about youth employment, the informal sector, and agriculture.  The informal sector is still part of the economy but is not formalized, like jobs that are "under the table" or illegal.  He also argues that work is different than jobs and employment.  Work includes hobbies and things that contribute to overall health.  He presents the idea  that we need to include work in human development because they add richness to life. 

He says that the Human Development Index is just a measure of human development, it does not capture the totality of the notion of human development.  This means that any conclusion taken from this index should also consider the fact that it could miss key elements.  Human development uses two measures: breadth and focus.  The breadth shows different indicators of human development that can then be analyzed.  The focus measure is like the Human development Index that focuses on three things: a long and healthy life, knowledge, and a decent standard of living. 

Hans Rosling states that "we underestimate the tremendous social change that often precedes economic change."  The prime example he uses in this instance is China.  China's communist society does not only effect their economic structure, but also the way their society operates. 
