# Geospatial Data Methods in the Fight Against Malaria
By: Meredith Webb


April 5th, 2020

## Introduction
Malaria is an infectious disease spread by mosquito bites that is prevalent around the world, but most notably in sub-Saharan and central Africa; half a billion cases and two million deaths are recorded every year, and out of those cases, half of them are children in sub-Saharan Africa. With poor housing, inadequate health care, and the most effective malaria vector-- the mosquito Anopheles gambiae-- being most widespread in Africa, the disease has yet to be eliminated and continues to negatively affect African communities.  Over the past 20 years, many improvements and advancements have been made in treatment and prevention.  However, there is still much work to be done.  

## Human Development Topic/ Process
The spread of malaria has crippling impacts on the communities it is prevalent in; consequently, the task of combating malaria is extremely complex.  Many factors must be investigated to create an effective strategy.  Environmental conditions--such as climate and distance to water sources--, land use, agricultural processes, socioeconomic status, and quality of housing were all components in the presence of malaria in a given area.  The World Health Organization (WHO) has been involved in many malaria initiatives, such as the WHO Global Technical Strategy and the Global Malaria Eradication Programme (GMEP.)  The WHO-led Global Malaria Eradication Programme (GMEP) highlighted many benefits from international collaboration including: regular data sharing and coordination, special border zones for intensified activities, and administrative systems for health personnel from each country to readily transit borders. GMEPs structures were widely successful in its efforts to decrease malaria in many regions. The new WHO Global Technical Strategy for Malaria takes after that and highlights a need for a deeper regional collaboration [9].

Amartya Sen’s definition of human development defines human development with freedom as both the primary objective and principle means of development.  When the health of a society is improved, their opportunities and freedoms increase as well.  Better treatment and prevention of malaria has an obvious advancement on quality of life.  In my research I explored many facets of the issue of malaria treatment and prevention.  In one of the articles I researched, scientists were testing ways to make a more effective malaria vaccine. When patients diagnosed with malaria can be treated in an effective, timely manner, they can go back to their lives without the mystery of if they will get sick again. Vaccines with high efficacy give people the liberty to live their lives without the burden of illness.  Also,  these healthy people can contribute to their area’s economy. This type of development is truly human development “for the people ‘’ by improving the condition of thousands of people. 

Another area of malaria that I explored was the effectiveness of regional initiatives, which are a means of human development.  By collaborating across countries for disease treatment and prevention, these solutions provide greater opportunities for a mass population of people. This relates to the sustainable development goals of good health and wellbeing, sustainable cities and communities, and most relevantly, partnerships for the goals. Though it can be complicated for less developed and sometimes dangerous countries in Africa to effectively collaborate with each other, it is pressing for these countries to take action.  The wellbeing of their citizens depends on action, which can be aided with the use of data science.  Sen also believes that improvements of GDP and income are not the only indicator of a country’s human development advances. It is evident that intervention and aid from better-off countries can be vital in the advancement of the freedoms and opportunities available in impoverished areas. The United States has the means to create sustainable futures for other countries, and the data I investigated show that it is effective and efficient when they do so.

Malaria infects 300 million people every year, with 90% of malaria-related deaths occurring in Sub-Saharan Africa [3].  Though this number is slowing down, in 2018 half of the world’s population was at risk for malaria.  The groups most at risk for the disease are infants, pregnant women, patients with HIV/AIDs, and mobile populations [11].  National malaria control programs need to take measures to protect at risk groups for infection and improve the use of data science as a way to identify groups and their needs. There is a fundamental need for precise local information on malaria as more countries approach elimination and are burdened by difficulties of funding, insecticide resistance, and antimalarial resistance [4].  

## Data
I explored many different uses of data science methods.  Geospatial research has gained popularity in use to find environmental data that identifies probable vector breeding sites, mosquito abundance, and malaria risk associated with proximity of human residence to breeding sites.  These studies have shown an association between environmental divers and measures of malaria infection in human populations.  These drivers include rainfall, temperature, distance to rivers, and altitude [1].  Global warming, deforestation, and changes in land use have also been investigated using geospatial analysis with remote sensing data; specifically,  these data showed an increased malaria risk during periods of deforestation in parts of Latin America.  Spatial analytical studies have also found associations in socioeconomic factors and malaria risk at a range of spatial scales [1].  When the proportion of the population living in poverty is high, risk of malaria is high, as is the case with quality of housing [6].  One of the studies I found surveyed data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) conducted in 21 countries with a binary housing variable where houses built using finished wall, roof, and floor materials were classified as “modern” and all other houses were classified as “traditional.”  Across the hundreds of thousands of surveys conducted, modern housing was associated with a 9-14% reduction in the odds of malaria infection [6].  They conducted their analyses in Stata with variables like housing quality, insecticide-treated net use, household wealth, association between housing quality and malaria infection, and association between insecticide-treated net use and malaria infection. The authors acknowledge that insecticide- treated nets and indoor residual spraying are highly effective methods of vector control, but additional actions must be taken for long-term, sustainable control of the disease. This is where housing improvements could play a part in advancing human development in these areas by providing a sustainable way to reduce cases of the disease. However, housing is not the only solution. There are many options for solutions that must be explored, like any major human development issue.  In another study, risk of malaria in urban and rural populated areas, was found to be greatest in the outside of settlements and rural areas, due to their proximity to vegetated sites that are mosquito breeding habitats [1]. 

In addition, I investigated sources that used survey data from the Malaria Atlas Project (MAP).  Since its creation in 2005, MAP has assembled and maintained a global open access database of spatially explivit malariometric data.  MAP uses model based geostatistics to predict the global spatial distribution of malaria risk, amount of people living in malaria-endemic places, and the number of those who become ill. They also attempt to predict the uncertainty in these predictions.  Recent uses of MAP have used mathematical modelling of the associations between prevalence and other metrics to establish a wider range of information to scientists and governments [5].  These data gives knowledge about the global situation and spatial predictions in countries, enabling them to define subnational heterogeneity in malaria risk. MAP has a specific utility for spatial epidemiological analysis of malaria; the available data types include malaria parasite rate, vector occurrence, subnational administrative boundary shapefiles, and rasters covering a myriad of metrics related to malaria research.  The MAP work was motivated by aims of enhancing open-access malaria data available and providing operationally relevant information for global policymakers.   In one of the articles I read, the authors concluded that MAP is the first open-access R- interface to malariometric data, which provides a new and reproducible means of accessing data within a publicly available and common statistical software environment [4].  It aims to contribute to the environment of data-sharing within the malaria research community.  This malariometric data has supported prominent international research, includin the Global Burden of Diease Study and the World Malaria Report. The data spans various formats, topic areas and spatial resolutions.  Included is survey data for accurate point locations, administrative unit level routine surveillance data, and raster grids of spatially continuous modelled predictions.  

Data is used in increasing the efficacy of vaccines as well.  Pregnant women have a notable risk when being diagnosed with malaria due to the possibility of adverse pregnancy and birth defects that accompany malaria in pregnancy (MiP).  Recently, attention has been drawn to intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy, a process which has historically had low coverage in impoverished countries.  In an article I found, a study was conducted using an existing mathematical model of MiP combined with estimates of the changing endemicity of malaria across Africa with maps of SP resistance mutations and current coverage of antenatal access and IPTp with DP across Africa. Using estimates of relationships between resistance mutations and the parasitological efficacy of SP during pregnancy, they estimated the varying impact of IPTp with SP across Africa and the value of enhancing its uptake to match current antenatal care coverage.  Their study concluded that despite the continuous decline of malaria transmission in Africa, the burden of MiP in the lack of effective prevention remains significant. Even accounting for the resistance of SP, extending IPTp with SP to all women attending antenatal care would have a substantial impact on maternal and infant health in most malaria- endemic settings in sub-Saharan Africa. They used geospatial data to show percentages of mutations across Africa and expose highly affected areas [8]. 

In another article I investigated, the authors used difference- in-differences analysis to compare trends in the outcome of under-5 mortality rates and secondary outcomes in population coverage of malaria interventions in various United States President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI) recipient and non-recipient  countries.  A difference in differences analysis is a statistical technique used in quantitative research that attempts to mimic an experimental research design using observational study data, by studying the differential effect of a treatment on a 'treatment group' versus a 'control group.  They concluded that the PMI program implementation was associated with a reduction in the annual risk of under-5 child mortality.  Each dollar of per-capita PMI expenditures in a country was also associated with a reduction of child mortality [10].  

## Discussion
There is much data to be investigated when considering the prevention and treatment of malaria.  However, the absence of detailed surveillance data in most malaria-endemic countries, many of which with limited technology usage, poses a need for alternative methods to define populations at risk, such as spatial risk prediction.  In a prediction as such, a model is built with data from a sample of the population and used to predict the risk of malaria for the entire population [6].  Increased use of Bayesian models that use probabiity to show all uncertainty within the model (in both the input and output) allows comprehensive and flexible assessment of the  predictions.  However, there are disadvantages to these models because the skills needed to implement these model based geostatistics are not available in most malaria-endemi countries.  There are also large computational demands of running these models with large datasets [6].  The corrupt governments in many of the sub-Saharan African countries may not be willing to provide funds for models like this. Therefore, designing and implementing data-sharing systems is vital to the success of a regional initiative and longterm solution for malaria elimination. Though it can be complicated for less developed and sometimes dangerous countries in Africa to effectively collaborate with each other, it is pressing for these countries to share knowledge.  Databases like Malaria Atlas provide insight into the worldwide situation.  However, such large-scale studies likely overlook important small-scale variations in malaria transmission, and might be of restricted use in the operations of localised elimination programs [4].   Remote sensing could provide instruments for interventions in which spatial information about the environment is used to identify and eliminate vector breeding sites, but has not been tested in operational studies.  This points to a gap in the research of malaria intervention.  By filling this gap, scientists will be able to make more conclusions like the data found that supports housing improvements as a promision intervention for sustainable malaria control.  Successful interventions can be made if research is pointed in the right direction.  

### Resources:
1. Clements, A. C., Reid, H. L., Kelly, G. C., & Hay, S. I. (2013). Further shrinking the malaria map: how can geospatial science help to achieve malaria elimination? The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 13(8), 709–718. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(13)70140-3
2. Tewara, M. A., Mbah-Fongkimeh, P. N., Dayimu, A., Kang, F., & Xue, F. (2018, December 7). Small-area spatial statistical analysis of malaria clusters and hotspots in Cameroon;2000-2015. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6286522/
3. Ruktanonchai, N. W., DeLeenheer, P., Tatem, A. J., Alegana, V. A., Caughlin, T. T., Erbach-Schoenberg, E. zu, … Smith, D. L. (n.d.). Identifying Malaria Transmission Foci for Elimination Using Human Mobility Data. Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004846
4. Pfeffer, D. A., Lucas, T. C. D., May, D., Harris, J., Rozier, J., Twohig, K. A., … Gething, P. W. (2018). malariaAtlas: an R interface to global malariometric data hosted by the Malaria Atlas Project. Malaria Journal, 17(1). doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2500-5
5. Guerra, C. A., Citron, D. T., García, G. A., & Smith, D. L. (2019). Characterising malaria connectivity using malaria indicator survey data. Malaria Journal, 18(1). doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-3078-2
6. Tusting, L. S., Bottomley, C., Gibson, H., Kleinschmidt, I., Tatem, A. J., Lindsay, S. W., & Gething, P. W. (n.d.). Housing Improvements and Malaria Risk in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Multi-Country Analysis of Survey Data. Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002234
7. Refresh Consultative Panel. (n.d.). malERA: An updated research agenda for diagnostics, drugs, vaccines, and vector control in malaria elimination and eradication. Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002455
8. Walker, P. G. T., Floyd, J., Kuile, F. ter, & Cairns, M. (n.d.). Estimated impact on birth weight of scaling up intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy given sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in Africa: A mathematical model. Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002243
9. Lover, A. A., Harvard, K. E., Lindawson, A. E., Gueye, C. S., Shretta, R., Gosling, R., & Feachem, R. (n.d.). Regional initiatives for malaria elimination: Building and maintaining partnerships. Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002401
10. Jakubowski, A., Stearns, S. C., Kruk, M. E., Angeles, G., & Thirumurthy, H. (n.d.). The US President's Malaria Initiative and under-5 child mortality in sub-Saharan Africa: A difference-in-differences analysis. Retrieved from https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002319
11. Fact sheet about Malaria. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/malaria
